So what are greedy algorithms good for?
Well, it turns out they're well suited
for a number of fundamental problems
across different domains of computer
science.
And to wet your appetite, for the many
examples that we're going to see, I want
to begin by discussing the problem of
optimal caching.
The punchline of the lecture is going to
be that a natural greedy algorithm in
fact minimizes the number of cache misses
over all possible ways of managing a
small fast cache.
So what is the caching problem?
Well on the one hand, there's going to be
a big, but slow memory which you can
think of as holding everything you might
be interested in.
And then there's also going to be what we
call a cache and so this is a much
smaller memory to which access is much
faster.
So this situation comes up all the time
across different doings, computer
science, architecture, operating systems,
networking.
just to mention a couple of really
obvious examples.
You could imagine, the small fast memory
being something like an L2 cache.
And the big slow memory being main
memory.
Or perhaps actually main memory is the
fast memory, and the big slow memory
would be disc.
Now, your task, in the caching problem is
to process what we're going to call a
sequence of page requests.
So a page request just means that the
client wants to access something in
memory and it's guaranteed to be in the
big slow memory.
But if its not already in the small fast
memory then you got to bring it in, you
got to put it in there for the subsequent
access.
The algorithmic aspect of the problem
answers the picture when there is a cache
miss or also known as a page fault.
That is when there is a request for some
data which is not already in the cache.
When that is the case, you have to bring
it into the cache.
The design question then is what do you
evict from the cache in order to make
room for this new piece of data which you
have to bring in.
So to illustrate the issues, let's look
at extremely simple example.
A cache that just has four slots for
pieces of data.
Let's assume that initially the cache is
seated with the four pieces of data I'll
call a, b, c, and d.
Now remember the input is a sequence of
page requests, so these are requests for
different pieces of data.
Now when a new request comes in, you're
basically sitting there crossing your
fingers that what's been requested is
already in the cache.
So for example, if the first request
comes in for the piece of data marked c,
you said good we're good to go it's
already in the cache go ahead and access
it.
Similarly if the next request is for d,
you don't have to do anything.
Good times roll, and d just gets accessed
directly.
The problem arises when something is
requested that's not in the cache. So
let's say the next request is for the
data item e.
Now remember, you have to bring e into
the cache and of course you have to evict
one of these four pieces of data to make
room for it, and your algorithm has to
decide which.
Can you get rid of a or b or c or d.
For this example, let's assume that we
evict a to make room for e.
Assume further that the next request that
comes in is for a new piece of data f.
Again it's not in the cache so we have to
evict something to make room for it.
Let's assume we get rid of b in order to
bring in f.
And now an unhappy situation but
something that could certainly occur is
we get a request for something that used
to be in the cache but which we have
since evicted.
So for example if the next request is for
a, then we're stuck.
It's going to be another page fault, we
have to evict something to bring in a.
And similarly, if there's a b, again
we're paying the price for evicting b to
make room for f in the past.
So in this example with these particular
choices for page evictions, we incur four
page faults.
Now the first two the e and the f there's
nothing we could have done about it.
We were given a cache that initially did
not have e and f and then e and f showed
up, well what are you going to do, you're
going to miss no matter what.
However, two were caused by our
unfortunate eviction decisions early on,
to evict a and b only to find them
requested after eviction.
And with 20/20 hindsight, we can conclude
we really should have evicted c and d,
not a and b, to make room for e and f.
So the point of this example is to
illustrate first of all the caching
problem, how it works.
You have this small fast memory, it can't
contain everything at once and so you
have to sort of manage the cache and
evict things, to make room for stuff as
it gets accessed.
That's the first point of the example.
The second point is to illustrate there's
really two types of cache misses or page
faults.
There's the ones which you know, really
you can't do anything about.
No matter what algorithm you use, you're
going to suffer those faults.
But then, depending on the eviction
algorithm, you maybe able to avoid some
of the cache misses that you would incur
with an inferior algorithm.
Algorithm.
So, now the obvious question is,
how well can we do?
What's the best algorithm?
How do we minimize the number of cache
misses, suffering only the ones that are
inevitable?
So this question was given a very elegant
answer by Belady back in the 1960's.
And I'm going to state the answer as a
theorem.
it's a theorem we're not going to prove,
for reasons I'll discuss in a second.
but what the theorem says is that a
natural greedy algorithm is an optimal
algorithm for the caching problem.
That is, it minimizes the number of cache
misses over any way you might think about
managing the cache.
And the natural greedy algorithm that is
optimal, is called the furthest in the
future algorithm.
So what is the furthest in the future
algorithm?
Well, it's exactly what you think it
would be.
It's basically what seems like a good
idea at the moment you have to perform a
eviction from the cache.
Basically you want to put off judgment
day.
You want to put off the regret of
evicting this particular piece of data as
long as possible.
When are you going to regret evicting a
piece of data?
Well, it's when it gets requested next.
So if we have four things in the cache,
you know, one is one is requested next,
one is requested in seven time steps and
one is requested in you know, 70 time
steps, that's the one you want to evict
now because it will take the longest
until you actually regret that eviction.
So for example, in the example on the
previous slide, you can check that the
furthest in the future algorithm would in
fact evict the ones you want to evict, a
and b,
not the ones that we evicted in the
example, c and d.
Now at this point, many of you are
probably justifiably scratching your
heads.
You're wondering, you know, why is this
useful.
It doesn't seem like this is what we
wanted. The objection, to this result
being that the furthest in the future
algorithm is clairvoyant. Its very
definition assumes that you know the
future, it assumes that at the moment
that you have to make an eviction you're
aware of when each of the pieces data in
the cache will be requested next.
But if you think for a minute about the
motivating applications for sudding the
ultimate caching problem, this assumption
simply doesn't hold, you simply do not
know the future, you simply do not know
when each of the pieces of data in your
cache will be requested next. So this
algorithm is not defined, it is
unimplementable.
Despite that, this is still an extremely
useful result to know.
Why.
Well, two reasons.
First of all, this unimplementable
algorithm can never the less, serve as a
guide line for practical.
Implementable algorithms.
For example it naturally motivates the
LRU or least recently used caching
algorithm.
So what you do in the LRU algorithm is
that instead of looking forward in the
future, which you can't do generally, you
look in the past.
And you say, well, let me guess that
whatever's been requested recently, will
be requested again soon.
Whatever hasn't been request been
requested for a long time, will continue
to not be requested for a long time.
So, that sets as a proxy for the piece of
data that's going to be referenced the
furthest down the future, you look for
the one that was most recently referenced
the furthest back in the past.
So that's the LRU algorithm.
And as long as data exhibits what's
called locality of reference,
meaning whatever's being requested a lot
in the recent past is also going to be
what's requested in the near future.
Then LRU is going to approximate furthest
in the future.
And indeed, LRU is in many applications,
the gold standard amongst practical
implementable caching algorithms.
The second reason this theorem is useful
in practice is because it served as an
idealized benchmark.
A hypothetical perfect scenario against
which you can compare your latest and
greatest cashing hereistic.
So for example, maybe you have a caching
application and you start by implementing
the LRU least recently used caching
algorithm and then as a sanity check you
probably want to go back later once you
have hindsight you look at the last few
days of traces of logs of page requests
and you say, how well did we do.
Let's look at how well our caching
algorithm LRU did.
And let's look at how well we would have
done had we known the future.
And hopefully, you're just a few percent
away.
And then you can conclude that, yes
indeed, the data seem to have locality
reference.
Yes indeed, LRU is doing almost as well
as if we know the future,
and we can proceed.
On the other hand, if you go back through
the last few days of logs, and you find
that your caching algorithm is doing much
worse than furthest in the future, then
it's back to the drawing board with
respect to your caching algorithm.
You should work harder, understand the
data better, and come up with a smarter
heuristic.
So for almost all of the greedy
algorithms that we cover in this course,
I'm going to explain to you why they are
correct.
I'm going to prove it rigorously.
this algorithm is an exception.
I'm actually not going to prove this
theorem for you.
the way it works is by what's called an
exchange argument.
So again, you may not have seen any
examples, but you will soon.
but the exchange argument to prove the
latter result, as far as I know it's
pretty tricky, believe it or not.
Even though the algorithm is natural, you
might think this result feels a little
self-evident.
Try to prove it rigorously.
Not easy.
Not easy at all.
Indeed if you look at a textbook and say
operating systems or a field like that,
generally you'll see a description of
this algorithm.
You'll see the claim that it's optimal
but you won't find the proof.
some algorithms textbooks, for example
Algorithm Design by Kleinberg and Tardos,
do include the proof of this theorem.
Those of you that are interested, I
challenge you to prove it yourself
without looking it up on the web or in a
textbook.
I think if you try to prove it you'll
appreciate the subtleties that come up in
understanding whether greedy algorithms
are correct or not.
In the best case scenario, I would love.
Love to see, a simple proof of this
theorem, something that I could explain
in a class like this, in say five minutes
or less,
that would be amazing.